IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025
12357
Learning to Explore Efﬁciently: Heterogeneous
Topological Graphs and Lightweight Global
Reasoning for Robotic Exploration
Zhi Li
, Kairao Zheng
, Yiqing Yuan
, Junlong Huang
, Xiaoxun Zhang
, Student Member, IEEE,
Jinze Wu
, and Hui Cheng
, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Autonomous exploration in large-scale, unknown en-
vironments remains a signiﬁcant challenge in mobile robotics.
In this letter, we propose a scalable exploration framework that
integrates heterogeneous topological representations, lightweight
global-local graph reasoning, and reinforcement learning. Our
framework is computationally efﬁcient, comprehensively consid-
ers global spatial context, and generalizes effectively across di-
verse environmental scenarios. We introduce a compact topological
abstraction to encode crucial spatial and semantic information,
substantially reducing map complexity. A novel hybrid inference
module, combining linear global attention with local graph con-
volutions, effectively integrates long-range exploration with com-
prehensive local coverage. We further design a minimalist reward
functionpairedwithacurriculumlearningtoensurestabletraining
and enhanced generalization. A viewpoint-based action masking
mechanism further reﬁnes the action space, accelerating learning
convergence. Extensive simulations demonstrate our method con-
sistently surpasses state-of-the-art baselines, achieving up to 14.5%
shorter exploration time and 18.8% reduced path length while
maintaining low computational overhead. Real-world experiments
further validate the practical effectiveness of our approach for
robotic exploration tasks.
Index Terms—Autonomous systems, motion and path planning,
reinforcement learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
A
UTONOMOUS exploration in large, unstructured envi-
ronments is a fundamental challenge in mobile robotics,
Received 25 May 2025; accepted 7 October 2025. Date of publication 17
October 2025; date of current version 24 October 2025. This article was
recommended for publication by Associate Editor P. Falco and Editor J. Kober
upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This work was supported by the
National Key R&D Program of China under Grant 2022ZD0119602. (Zhi Li
and Kairao Zheng contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding author:
Hui Cheng.)
Zhi Li is with the School of Systems Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510275, China.
Kairao Zheng, Yiqing Yuan, Xiaoxun Zhang, and Hui Cheng are with
the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: chengh9@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
Junlong Huang is with the School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China.
Jinze Wu is with the Department of Electronics and Telecommunications,
Politecnico di Torino, 10129 Turin, Italy, and also with the School of Automation
and Intelligent Manufacturing, Southern University of Science and Technology,
Shenzhen 518055, China.
This
article
has
supplementary
downloadable
material
available
at
https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2025.3622906, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/LRA.2025.3622906
with applications in search and rescue, industrial inspection, and
environmental monitoring [1], [2]. Despite decades of progress,
designing exploration systems that are both computationally
efﬁcient and behaviorally robust remains a challenging task.
Classical frontier-based methods [3], [4], [5] address this chal-
lenge by decomposing the task into frontier detection, viewpoint
selection, and path planning, providing an interpretable frame-
work for exploration. However, these methods incur substantial
computational overhead as the environment expands.
To improve scalability, recent research explores learning-
based approaches, particularly Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL) [6], [7], which optimizes exploration policies through
interaction with the environment. DRL demonstrates strong
performance in long-horizon decision making under partial
observability. However, sparse and delayed rewards and the
absence of structured priors hinder policy learning in large
environments [8]. Furthermore, existing methods often overlook
geometric information embedded in environmental topology,
leading to inefﬁcient exploration and limited generalization.
Bridging the gap between the structure-aware reasoning and
the ﬂexibility of learning-based policies thus remains a pressing
challenge.
In this letter, we propose a scalable graph-based exploration
framework that integrates heterogeneous graph representations
with global-local reasoning and RL. The main contributions are
summarized as follows.
r Heterogeneous Graph Abstraction: We design a compact
yet expressive topological representation of the environ-
ment,withdiversenodetypes(frontiers,borders,skeletons,
viewpoints) that encode distinct spatial and semantic roles.
This abstraction reduces the complexity of large-scale
maps while preserving critical cues such as connectivity,
visibility, and coverage gain.
r Global-Local Graph Inference Module: We develop a hy-
brid graph neural network (GNN) that combines linear
global attention with local graph convolution. This enables
efﬁcient O(N) reasoning while preserving structural bias,
allowing the policy to balance long-range exploration with
low computation.
r Sparse Reward Optimization via Curriculum Learning:
We design a minimalist reward function with path cost
and terminal completion terms. This avoids complex
2377-3766 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on October 29,2025 at 10:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
12358
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025
reward shaping and hand-tuned weights, preventing reward
hacking. To improve training efﬁciency and generalization,
we adopt a curriculum learning that gradually increases
decision frequency.
r Viewpoint-Based Action Masking: We apply classical
viewpoint extraction to constrain the action space to infor-
mative viewpoints. This mitigates over-squashing effects
from neighbor-based selection. It also ensures task com-
pletion and signiﬁcantly accelerates learning by reducing
variance and improving sample efﬁciency.
Extensive experiments in diverse large-scale scenarios show
that our framework improves exploration performance, respon-
siveness, and generalization over state-of-the-art methods. Our
method reduces exploration time by up to 14.5% and path
length by up to 18.8% in complex environments, while main-
taining high-frequency decision-making capabilities with low
computational overhead, highlighting its efﬁciency and practical
effectiveness for real-time exploration.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Exploration-Oriented Map Representations
Efﬁcient spatial representation is crucial to robotic explo-
ration. Dense occupancy grids are costly in large-scale envi-
ronments [9], leading to sparse alternatives such as Euclidean
Signed Distance Fields (ESDF) [10], topological graphs [11],
and skeleton-based maps [12]. Skeleton-based methods, espe-
cially those from Hamilton-Jacobi formulations, capture naviga-
ble pathways with minimal redundancy. Frontier-based explo-
ration leverages topological abstractions to simplify viewpoint
selection and planning [4], [5], [13]. However, homogeneous
representations cannot distinguish between frontiers, borders,
and viewpoints, limiting their expressiveness. To address this,
we introduce a heterogeneous representation that explicitly en-
codes different node types, improving both structural clarity and
semantic precision.
B. Efﬁcient Graph-Based Reasoning Methods
GNNs,
including
Graph
Convolutional
Networks
(GCNs) [14], Graph Attention Networks (GATs) [15], and
Transformer-based models [16], have shown promise in
navigation
and
exploration.
However,
traditional
GNNs
often encounter quadratic complexity and issues such as
over-smoothing and over-squashing [17]. Recent variants
like Linear Transformers and Graph Linear Attention [18],
[19] reduce complexity to linear order. However, these
approaches may compromise local structural bias or remain
inefﬁcient
in
complex
real-world scenarios.
To
address
this, we propose a hybrid graph reasoning architecture
that combines linear-complexity global attention with local
graph convolutions, capturing long-range dependencies while
preserving local structure, improving inference efﬁciency and
scalability for real-time exploration in large-scale environments.
C. Action Space Design for Exploration
The design of the action space strongly affects the efﬁciency
of RL-based exploration methods. Neighbor-based action selec-
tion, which uses adjacent nodes in a topological map [7]. leads
to long decision sequences and unstable policy training under
sparse rewards. In dense graphs, it further causes over-squashing
[17], reducing learning efﬁciency. In contrast, viewpoint-based
action selection samples a limited set of informative viewpoints,
reducing decision sequence length and ensuring exploration
completion [13], [20], which alleviates sparse rewards and
over-squashing. Inspired by these advantages, we introduce a
viewpoint-based action mask that integrates classical viewpoint
extraction into RL, constraining the action space to ensure task
completeness and improve stability by addressing challenges
related to sparse rewards and information compression.
D. Sparse Reward Optimization and Curriculum Learning
Sparse rewards pose a signiﬁcant challenge in RL-based ex-
ploration when feedback is rare [21]. Go-Explore [22] mitigates
this by revisiting promising states, while other approaches use
coverage rewards [23], curiosity [24], or hand-tuned reward
functions [25], which risk reward hacking and limited gener-
alization [26]. Curriculum learning, which incrementally in-
creases task complexity during training, has shown effectiveness
in improving RL stability and generalization [27]. To address
these issues, we propose a minimalist reward function consisting
only of a path cost and a terminal completion reward, avoiding
intricate reward shaping and minimizing reward hacking. Addi-
tionally, we introduce a straightforward curriculum that gradu-
ally increases decision frequency to enhance training stability,
policy generalization, and overall exploration performance.
III. PRELIMINARIES
We formulate autonomous exploration as a Partially Observ-
able Markov Decision Process (POMDP) and describe the scene
representation and reward design.
A. POMDP Formulation
Autonomous exploration task is to ﬁnd the shortest path that
covers all traversable areas of an unknown environment while
incrementally updating a belief map. We formulate this as a
POMDP ⟨S, A, P, O, R, γ⟩, where S is the full state space, O the
partial observations from sensors (e.g., LiDAR), A the discrete
action set of candidate waypoints, P(s′|s, a) the state-transition
model, R(s, a, s′) the reward function, and γ ∈[0, 1) the dis-
count factor.
We represent the environment as a topological graph G =
(V, E) to bridge the sim-to-real gap when processing raw sensor
data. The state s corresponds to the global topological map
that captures the complete spatial information. This graph ef-
ﬁciently encodes the environment where nodes v ∈V capture
key attributes (e.g., frontier values, traversability metrics) and
edges e ∈E represent feasible paths. The observation O at
each decision step is the current topological graph built from
the robot’s partial knowledge. The action space A consists of
selecting the next node to visit, simplifying planning compared
to dense map representations. The reward function combines
distance cost and completion bonus:
R(s, a, s′) = −λ · Rc(s, s′) + Rf(s′),
(1)
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on October 29,2025 at 10:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LI et al.: LEARNING TO EXPLORE EFFICIENTLY: HETEROGENEOUS TOPOLOGICAL GRAPHS AND LIGHTWEIGHT GLOBAL REASONING
12359
Fig. 1.
Overview of the proposed exploration framework. (a) Heterogeneous graph construction: Incremental abstraction from occupancy grid to topological graph
through boundary deﬁnition, skeleton extraction, and viewpoint insertion, producing semantically distinct node types (frontier, border, skeleton, viewpoint). (b)
Graph-based inference framework: A lightweight encoder-decoder architecture combining linear global attention and local graph convolution efﬁciently generates
embeddings, aggregates global context, and selects optimal viewpoints via an attention-guided action mask.
where Rc(s, s′) is the path cost, and Rf(s′) is the ﬁnal comple-
tion reward. Parameter λ ensures λ · Rc < γT Rf, prioritizing
exploration completion over minimizing path length, where T
denotes the truncation horizon.
B. Heterogeneous Graph-Based Topological Mapping
To preserve rich environmental information while minimiz-
ing redundant nodes, we represent the environment as a het-
erogeneous graph G = (V, E, T), where V denotes vertices, E
denotes edges (vi, vj) connecting these vertices, and T denotes
predeﬁned vertex types. Each vertex vi ∈V is associated with
an attribute vector u tailored to its speciﬁc role. Here, we
focus explicitly on distinguishing vertex types and ignore edge
attributes.
1) Vertex Extraction: Starting from a 2D occupancy grid
map classiﬁed into free, occupied, and unknown cells, we build
a heterogeneous graph by extracting key vertices V in three
steps: deﬁning boundaries, extracting skeleton, and inserting
viewpoints. First, we deﬁne two types of boundary vertices (see
Fig. 1): Frontier vertices vf, extracted from free cells adjacent
to unknown cells, marking exploration frontiers, and Border
vertices vb, extracted from free cells adjacent to occupied cells,
indicating traversability boundaries. Next, inspired by [12], we
extract Skeleton vertices vk by deriving a Hamilton-Jacobi
skeleton (see Fig. 1) from the occupancy grid’s ESDF, which
identiﬁes essential pathways in free space. Finally, following the
classical frontier-based exploration strategy [20], we compute
Viewpoints vv that strategically observe unexplored regions.
This structured approach ensures compactness and semantic
clarity for effective exploration planning.
2) Edge Construction: With V deﬁned, we establish the
edges E to ensure connectivity. We generate candidate edges
by performing a Delaunay triangulation over the entire node
set using the CGAL library [28], providing a well-distributed
set of connections. Each edge is then validated by collision
checking against the occupancy grid, and those intersecting
occupied or unknown cells are removed. This deterministic
ﬁltering procedure eliminates invalid or redundant connections
while preserving essential pathways, resulting in a sparse yet
well-connected roadmap suitable for exploration.
3) Vertex Attributes: Each vertex type is assigned a concise
attribute vector u tailored for decision-making. Frontier (vf)
and border (vb) store spatial coordinates u = [x, y], sufﬁcient
for marking transitions to unknown or obstructed areas. Skeleton
vertices additionally include ESDF-based clearance information
u = [x, y, d]. Lastly, viewpoint vertices (vv) encode observation
utility as u = [x, y, ϵ], where ϵ quantiﬁes potential exploration
gain. This tailored attribute structure enriches the graph repre-
sentation without redundancy, enhancing exploration effective-
ness and planning efﬁciency.
IV. SCALABLE GRAPH-BASED INFERENCE FRAMEWORK
A. Framework Overview
We propose a scalable encoder–decoder framework for
robotic exploration (Fig. 1). The encoder combines a linear
global attention mechanism [19] with local graph convolutions
to capture both long-range and local spatial contexts in O(N)
time, while the decoder applies attention-based action selection
constrained by a viewpoint-based action mask. This design
ensureslinearscalabilityandrobustdecision-makingincomplex
environments.
B. Encoder
We ﬁrst encode vertex attributes uv into a latent embedding
h(0)
v
= ft(uv), where t = T(v), and ft is a type-speciﬁc MLP.
The resulting embeddings, h(0) ∈RN×d, form the basis for
subsequent computations.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on October 29,2025 at 10:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
12360
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025
To efﬁciently capture global interactions, we adopt a lin-
ear global attention mechanism. Unlike conventional softmax
attention with O(N 2) complexity [29], our method operates
in linear time, O(N), enabling scalable reasoning on large
graphs. Speciﬁcally, given initial embeddings h(0), we compute
normalized query, key, and value matrices:
Q = fQ

h(0)
,
˜Q =
Q
∥Q∥F
,
K = fK

h(0)
,
˜K =
K
∥K∥F
,
V = fV

h(0)
,
(2)
where fQ, fK, fV are linear transformations, and ∥· ∥F denotes
the Frobenius norm. Node embeddings are updated efﬁciently
using a diagonal normalization matrix D:
D = diag

1 + 1
N
˜Q( ˜K⊤1)

,
(3)
hg = βD−1

V + 1
N
˜Q( ˜K⊤V)

+ (1 −β)h(0),
(4)
where 1 ∈RN is an all-ones vector, and β is a hyperparameter
balancing global attention and residual connections. This design
effectively captures long-range dependencies while preserving
localstructuralintegrity,makingitparticularlysuitableforlarge-
scale graph-based exploration.
To effectively incorporate local structural constraints from the
graph adjacency matrix A, we fuse the global embeddings hg
with local graph convolutional updates. Speciﬁcally, we employ
a simple yet efﬁcient approach:
ho = (1 −α) hg + α GN

h(0), A
	
,
(5)
where GN(·) denotes a scalable GCN [14], α balances global
attention and local connectivity, and the resulting embeddings
ho = [hv]N
v=1 serve as inputs to the decoder. This integration
ensures the model simultaneously captures global structural
relationships and local graph connectivity, enhancing inference
quality for exploration tasks.
C. Decoder
The decoder aims to produce a global graph-level embedding
from the node-level embeddings ho. To intuitively aggregate
global information, we adopt a global attention mechanism [29],
in which the embedding of the robot’s current vertex hc ∈ho
naturally serves as the query:
hagg = Attn(hc, ho).
(6)
This approach effectively summarizes the global context by
weighting node embeddings according to their relevance to
the robot’s current position, capturing essential structural and
semantic information for subsequent decision-making. The re-
sulting graph-level embedding hagg is then jointly utilized by
the policy head to determine the next action and by the value
Algorithm 1: Curriculum-Based PPO Training.
1:
Input: total episodes N, PPO hyperparameters
2:
Stage allocation: N × (0.625, 0.125, 0.125, 0.125)
3:
Frequencies: (1: full, 2: 0.125 Hz, 3: 0.5 Hz, 4: 2 Hz)
4:
for episode = 1 to N do
5:
determine stage s by index; run episode with
frequency of s
6:
collect trajectories D, compute advantages with GAE
7:
update policy πθ and value Vφ using PPO
8:
end for
9:
return trained policy πθ
head to estimate expected returns, ensuring coherent exploration
strategies.
D. Action Selection and Value Estimation
Given the graph-level embedding hagg from the decoder, we
employ a single-head attention mechanism to determine the next
action. Speciﬁcally, we compute relevance scores between hagg
and candidate vertex embeddings:
logits(v) = h⊤
aggho[v],
v ∈A,
(7)
where A denotes the set of feasible actions. Action probabilities
are then obtained via softmax normalization.
To improve learning efﬁciency and alleviate over-squashing
in dense graphs, we introduce a viewpoint-based action mask.
Unlike conventional adjacency-based masks, our method selec-
tively retains only informative viewpoints—vertices expected
to signiﬁcantly reveal unexplored areas—resulting in a compact
and semantically meaningful action set. This targeted pruning
accelerates policy convergence and enhances exploration effec-
tiveness.
Simultaneously, the value head estimates expected re-
turns from the shared embedding hagg using a lightweight
MLP. This shared representation facilitates joint optimiza-
tion of immediate action quality and long-term explo-
ration performance, improving both coherence and sample
efﬁciency.
E. RL With Curriculum Learning Strategy
We train our exploration policy using Proximal Policy Op-
timization (PPO) [30], a stable and efﬁcient reinforcement
learning algorithm. To improve training stability and policy
generalization, we employ a curriculum learning approach that
progressively increases decision frequency during training. Ini-
tially, actions correspond to full viewpoint traversals (Stage 1),
simplifying the action space and stabilizing early value estima-
tion. Subsequently, we incrementally raise decision frequency
(Stages2–3:0.125Hzto0.5Hz),allowingthepolicytosmoothly
adapt to ﬁner-grained control. Finally, training transitions to the
target high-frequency condition (Stage 4: 2 Hz), closely aligning
with real-world robotic operations. This structured curriculum
enhances convergence, robustness, and overall exploration ef-
fectiveness.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on October 29,2025 at 10:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LI et al.: LEARNING TO EXPLORE EFFICIENTLY: HETEROGENEOUS TOPOLOGICAL GRAPHS AND LIGHTWEIGHT GLOBAL REASONING
12361
Fig. 2.
Scene illustration. (Left) Side views of the point clouds for the three random scenes—Pillars, Partitions, and Maze; (Right) Topdown views of typical
exploration trajectories by (a) TARE [4], (b) FAEL [5], (c) DRLE [7], and (d) our proposed method. The color gradient from blue to red indicates the progression
of each trajectory.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Implementation Details
We implement PPO using CleanRL [31] to ensure repro-
ducibility and conduct training on a server with an AMD EPYC
7773X 64-Core CPU and two NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPUs. Sim-
ulations were performed within MARSIM [32], a lightweight
LiDAR-based simulator. The policy and value networks share
an encoder over heterogeneous graphs, where each node has
a 6-dimensional feature embedded into a 64-dimensional latent
space via a two-layer MLP. To improve generalization and stabi-
lize training, coordinates are normalized by Min–Max scaling to
[0,1] and further converted to local frames relative to the robot’s
position, which mitigates distribution shift and facilitates policy
transfer.
B. Simulation Benchmark and Analysis
We evaluate exploration efﬁciency in three randomized en-
vironments (Pillars, Partitions, and Maze), shown in Fig. 2.
These scenarios differ in complexity, measured by the ratio of
the shortest collision-free path to the straight-line distance.
Our method is compared with state-of-the-art LiDAR-based
exploration algorithms: TARE [4], FAEL [5], and DRLE [7].
TARE employs dual-resolution mapping with dense local maps
for feasible trajectories and sparse global maps for coverage
guidance. FAEL uses rapid environment preprocessing and
heuristic path optimization, supporting high-frequency replan-
ning in large environments. DRLE utilizes deep reinforce-
ment learning with attention-based policies, adaptively selecting
viewpoints for reactive exploration.
We quantify the performance differences among the evaluated
methods using three metrics: run time, exploration time, and
movement distance. In all experiments, the robot is modeled
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT METHODS ON RANDOM SCENES
as a differential-drive vehicle with a maximum linear velocity
of 2 m/s, linear acceleration of 2.5 m/s2, and a LiDAR sen-
sor range of 40 m. In addition, the parameters for modules,
including viewpoint sampling, topological graph construction,
and trajectory optimization, were conﬁgured according to the
ofﬁcially recommended settings of the baseline methods for the
respective scenarios. The exploration terminates when coverage
reaches 95%. Each method is executed 10 times from identical
random starting positions in each scenario.
Table I summarizes the averaged performance across 10 trials,
with representative trajectories shown in Fig. 2. We further
analyze these results with respect to versatility, exploration
efﬁciency, and responsiveness.
a) Versatility: All methods complete the exploration tasks
in each scenario. However, DRLE degrades in Partitions and
Pillars due to large graph sizes, while our method maintains
consistent effectiveness and generalizes better across varied,
unseen environments.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on October 29,2025 at 10:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
12362
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025
Fig. 3.
Ablation study of curriculum learning. Performance comparison across
four decision-frequency stages (Stage 1: full traversal; Stages 2–4: 0.125, 0.5,
2 Hz). A progressive curriculum leads to faster convergence and improved ﬁnal
performance.
b) Exploration Efﬁciency: As shown in Table I, our method
achieves the best exploration time and path length across all
scenarios. Compared to the second-best planner, our method
reduces exploration time and path length by 14.5% and 18.8%
in Pillars, 13.3% and 11.4% in Partitions, and 0.8% and 7.2%
in Maze. Our method also yields the lowest variance across sce-
narios, showing stable performance. Unlike heuristic planners
(TARE, FAEL), which optimize locally and produce redundant
crossings, learning-based methods (ours and DRLE) achieve
more uniform coverage, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
c) Responsiveness: Runtime comparisons in Table I high-
light responsiveness differences. FAEL achieves fast updates
through local planning but sacriﬁces path optimality. DRLE’s
transformer-based policy becomes less efﬁcient as its topologi-
cal graph grows. In contrast, the proposed method runs substan-
tially faster than DRLE and remains comparable to heuristic
baselines, supporting real-time deployment.
C. Ablation Study of Curriculum
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed curriculum
learning strategy, we conduct an ablation study across four
decision-frequency stages, as shown in Fig. 3. Speciﬁcally,
Stage 1 executes a full viewpoint traversal per decision (i.e.,
extremely low frequency). Stages 2–4 introduce intermediate
and high-frequency decisions at 0.125 Hz, 0.5 Hz, and the target
frequency of 2 Hz, respectively. Quantitative results indicate
that progressively increasing decision frequency improves both
convergence speed and ﬁnal exploration performance. Training
solely at the lowest frequency (Stage 1) simpliﬁes the critic’s
task and enables rapid initial convergence, but lacks exposure to
the ﬁne-grained decision dynamics required at higher frequen-
cies, limiting generalization. Conversely, training directly at the
highest frequency (Stage 4) slows learning and causes instability
in value estimation due to dense temporal feedback. Gradually
transitioning through intermediate frequencies (Stages 2–3) al-
lows stable adaptation of the critic, leading to improved policy
generalization and performance under realistic high-frequency
conditions.
Fig. 4.
Ablation study of global attention. Performance comparison of three
variants: GCN-only, MHA-only, and Proposed. Our hybrid approach achieves
the best balance of efﬁciency and exploration effectiveness.
D. Ablation Study of Global Attention
To evaluate the role of global attention, we compare three ar-
chitectural variants, as shown in Fig. 4: (1) the Proposed model,
which integrates linear global attention and local GCN-based
message passing; (2) the GCN-only variant, which removes
global attention; and (3) the Multi-Head Attention (MHA)-only
variant, which replaces both modules with standard MHA con-
strained by graph-based masking. Experimental results indicate
that the proposed hybrid architecture achieves the best balance
among convergence speed, exploration efﬁciency, and consis-
tency. The GCN-only variant struggles with large environments
due to its limited ability to capture global dependencies. Al-
though the MHA-only variant effectively models global context,
its computational complexity signiﬁcantly increases memory
usage and slows training, reducing practicality.
E. Ablation Study of Heterogeneous Graph
To evaluate the role of heterogeneous graph abstraction, we
compare our full model with a homogeneous variant where all
nodes share the same minimal attribute vector [x, y, ϵ], where
(x, y) is the spatial coordinate and ϵ quantiﬁes potential explo-
ration gain. In contrast, the heterogeneous graph assigns type-
speciﬁc attributes to frontier, border, skeleton, and viewpoint
nodes, preserving their distinct semantics. As shown in Fig. 6,
the heterogeneous variant achieves consistently higher rewards
andshortertraveldistancesafterconvergence,whilemaintaining
stable training. The homogeneous variant still learns reasonable
policies, but suffers from less efﬁcient exploration due to the loss
of structural priors. These results conﬁrm that the heterogeneous
abstraction is not only semantically interpretable and computa-
tionally lightweight, but also brings tangible improvements in
both exploration efﬁciency and policy performance.
F. Ablation Study of Viewpoint-Based Action Mask
To evaluate the effect of the viewpoint-based action mask, we
compare our full model against a baseline where the mask is
removed and all nodes in the heterogeneous graph are allowed
as candidate actions. Experimental results are shown in Figs. 7
and 8. When the mask is removed, the agent initially achieves
a higher cumulative reward and shorter travel distance since it
learns to minimize movement cost. However, this behavior is
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on October 29,2025 at 10:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LI et al.: LEARNING TO EXPLORE EFFICIENTLY: HETEROGENEOUS TOPOLOGICAL GRAPHS AND LIGHTWEIGHT GLOBAL REASONING
12363
Fig. 5.
Overview of real-world experimental setups and exploration results. (a, c) Aerial views of the two test scenarios, with (c) showing the manually deﬁned
bounding box (red dashed outline). (b, d) Corresponding LiDAR-generated pointcloud maps; the red dashed boxes in (b) indicate zoom-in regions for clarity. (e)
The wheeled bipedal robot platform equipped with Mid-360 LiDAR and Orin NX computing module.
Fig. 6.
Ablation study of heterogeneous graph. Comparison of heterogeneous
and homogeneous graph representations in terms of reward and travel distance.
Fig. 7.
Ablation study of viewpoint-based action mask. With viewpoint mask-
ing, the policy achieves stable rewards; without masking, training converges to
a degenerate strategy with high rewards but poor coverage.
Fig. 8.
Ablation study of viewpoint-based action mask. The exploration rate
rapidly declines without masking, indicating that the agent learns to remain idle
instead of exploring the environment.
degenerate because the exploration rate steadily decreases and
eventually approaches zero, meaning that the agent prefers to
stay idle or oscillate locally rather than covering new areas. As
a result, the environment is not sufﬁciently explored, and task
completion cannot be guaranteed. In contrast, the masked for-
mulation maintains stable reward, reduced travel distance, and
a consistently positive exploration rate, showing that it balances
reward optimization with coverage. These results indicate that
viewpoint-based action masking is not a minor heuristic but a
key mechanism that prevents collapse into trivial strategies and
ensures robust exploration performance.
G. Real-World Experiments
To validate the effectiveness and robustness of our proposed
method in realistic scenarios, we conducted extensive ﬁeld ex-
periments in both indoor (Fig. 5(a)) and outdoor (Fig. 5(c)) envi-
ronments using the wheeled bipedal robot DIABLO, equipped
with a Mid-360 LiDAR and an Orin NX onboard computer
(Fig. 5(e)). Remarkably, the policy trained in simulation was
directly deployed in these real-world scenarios in a zero-shot
manner, without any ﬁne-tuning or adaptation. All calcula-
tions were performed onboard, with dynamics constraints set
to vmax = 1.0 m/s and amax = 0.8 m/s.
In the indoor scenario, we explored a large and complex
ﬂoor that spans three interconnected buildings, covering ap-
proximately 2412.75 m2. The exploration terminated once no
frontiers or candidate viewpoints remained in the constructed
topological graph, which naturally occurred since the environ-
ment is a closed structure. The robot started from the edge of the
unexplored area without prior environmental knowledge, and
the exploration concluded in 629 s, traversing a trajectory of
514.72 m. Fig. 5(b) shows the ﬁnal generated map and explo-
ration paths, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method in
comprehensively covering corridors, rooms, and cluttered areas.
The outdoor scenario covered a signiﬁcantly larger test area of
approximately 9846.50 m2, featuring typical campus elements
such as open areas, walkways, and structured buildings. Since
the environment is open and unbounded, we deﬁned a bounding
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on October 29,2025 at 10:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
12364
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025
box in the robot’s initial coordinate frame by specifying ﬁxed
ranges along the x and y axes (highlighted by the red dashed
outline in Fig. 5(c)) to ensure a well-posed stopping condition.
The robot continued exploration within this bounded region until
no new viewpoints were generated, which resulted in completion
after 629 s and a trajectory of 351.93 m. Fig. 5(d) illustrates
accurate and comprehensive maps generated by our method,
validating reliable performance under challenging outdoor con-
ditions.
Overall, these real-world experiments highlight the scala-
bility, efﬁciency, and zero-shot performance of our proposed
method under realistic and complex environments.
VI. CONCLUSION
We proposed a scalable graph-based exploration frame-
work that integrates heterogeneous topological representations,
lightweight global-local reasoning, and reinforcement learn-
ing for large-scale autonomous exploration. The heterogeneous
graph encodes key spatial semantics in a compact yet expressive
form, while the combination of linear global attention and local
graph convolutions enhances inference efﬁciency and scalabil-
ity. A minimalist reward with curriculum learning mitigates
sparse-reward challenges and improves policy generalization,
and viewpoint-based action masking ensures robust and efﬁcient
decision-making. Extensive simulations and real-world exper-
iments demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms
state-of-the-art approaches in efﬁciency, stability, and general-
ization. Nevertheless, several limitations remain and should be
addressed in future work. First, the framework has not yet been
evaluated in highly dynamic environments, where viewpoint es-
timation may fail; addressing this issue could further enhance the
framework’s uncertainty-aware capabilities. Furthermore, the
current graph representation is restricted to 2D grids and ESDF
skeletons. Extending it to 3D structures with richer features
will broaden the framework’s applicability. Finally, the existing
policy selects only the next waypoint, whereas autoregressive
prediction of waypoint sequences would facilitate a tighter in-
tegration between global and local planning.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Romero, C. Delgado, L. Zanzi, R. Suárez, and X. Costa-Pérez,
“Cellular-enabled collaborative robots planning and operations for search-
and-rescue scenarios,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat., 2024,
pp. 5942–5948.
[2] S. Kim et al., “Gas source localization in unknown indoor environments
using dual-mode information-theoretic search,” IEEE Robot. Automat.
Lett., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 588–595, Jan. 2025.
[3] B. Yamauchi, “Frontier-based exploration using multiple robots,” ACM
SIGGRAPH, vol. 97, pp. 47–53, 1997.
[4] C. Cao, H. Zhu, H. Choset, and J. Zhang, “TARE: A hierarchical frame-
work for efﬁciently exploring complex 3D environments,” in Proc. Robot.:
Sci. Syst., vol. 5, 2021, p. 2.
[5] J. Huang et al., “FAEL: Fast autonomous exploration for large-scale
environments with a mobile robot,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 8,
no. 3, pp. 1667–1674, Mar. 2023.
[6] D. S. Chaplot, D. Gandhi, S. Gupta, A. Gupta, and R. Salakhutdinov,
“Learning to explore using active neural SLAM,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Representations, 2020, pp. 2193–2210.
[7] Y.Cao,R.Zhao,Y.Wang,B.Xiang,andG.Sartoretti,“Deepreinforcement
learning-based large-scale robot exploration,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett.,
vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 4631–4638, May 2024.
[8] Z. Li, Y. Yang, and H. Cheng, “Efﬁcient multi-agent cooperation: Scalable
reinforcement learning with heterogeneous graph networks and limited
communication,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 300, 2024, Art. no. 112124.
[9] A. Elfes, “Using occupancy grids for mobile robot perception and naviga-
tion,” IEEE Comput., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 46–57, Jun. 1989.
[10] H. Oleynikova, Z. Taylor, M. Fehr, R. Siegwart, and J. Nieto, “Voxblox:
Incremental 3D euclidean signed distance ﬁelds for on-board MAV
planning,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2017,
pp. 1366–1373.
[11] T. Noël, S. Kabbour, A. Lehuger, E. Marchand, and F. Chaumette, “Disk-
graph probabilistic roadmap: Biased distance sampling for path planning
in a partially unknown environment,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst., 2022, pp. 5707–5714.
[12] T. Noël, A. Lehuger, E. Marchand, and F. Chaumette, “Skeleton disk-
graph roadmap: A sparse deterministic roadmap for safe 2D navigation
and exploration,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 555–562,
Jan. 2024.
[13] B. Zhou, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, and S. Shen, “FUEL: Fast UAV exploration
using incremental frontier structure and hierarchical planning,” IEEE
Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 779–786, Apr. 2021.
[14] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2016,
pp. 2713–2726.
[15] P. Veliˇckovi´c, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y. Bengio,
“Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2018, pp. 2920–2931.
[16] S. Yun, M. Jeong, R. Kim, J. Kang, and H. J. Kim, “Graph transformer
networks,”inProc.Adv.NeuralInf.Process.Syst.,2019,pp.11983–11993.
[17] U. Alon and E. Yahav, “On the bottleneck of graph neural networks and its
practical implications,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021,
pp. 14048–14063.
[18] A. Katharopoulos, A. Vyas, N. Pappas, and F. Fleuret, “Transformers are
RNNs: Fast autoregressive transformers with linear attention,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 5156–5165.
[19] Q. Wu et al., “SGFormer: Simplifying and empowering transformers for
large-graph representations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023,
pp. 64753–64773.
[20] J. Yu, H. Shen, J. Xu, and T. Zhang, “ECHO: An efﬁcient heuristic view-
point determination method on frontier-based autonomous exploration for
quadrotors,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 5047–5054,
Aug. 2023.
[21] R. S. Sutton et al., Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction, vol. 1, no. 1.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1998.
[22] A. Ecoffet, J. Huizinga, J. Lehman, K. O. Stanley, and J. Clune,
“Go-explore: A new approach for hard-exploration problems,” 2019,
arXiv:1901.10995.
[23] A. Jonnarth, J. Zhao, and M. Felsberg, “Learning coverage paths in
unknown environments with deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, pp. 22491–22508.
[24] D. Pathak, P. Agrawal, A. A. Efros, and T. Darrell, “Curiosity-driven
exploration by self-supervised prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops, 2017, pp. 16–17.
[25] J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter, “Learning
quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain,” Sci. Robot., vol. 5,
no. 47, 2020, Art. no. eabc5986.
[26] L. Weng, “Reward hacking in reinforcement learning,” 2024. [On-
line]. Available: https://lilianweng.github.io/posts/2024-11-28-reward-
hacking/
[27] S. Narvekar, B. Peng, M. Leonetti, J. Sinapov, M. E. Taylor, and P. Stone,
“Curriculum learning for reinforcement learning domains: A framework
and survey,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 21, no. 181, pp. 1–50, 2020.
[28] O. Devillers, S. Hornus, and C. Jamin, “dD triangulations,” in CGAL User
and Reference Manual, CGAL Editorial Board, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://doc.cgal.org/6.0.1/Manual/packages.html#PkgTriangulations
[29] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2017, vol. 30, pp. 6000–6010.
[30] J.Schulman,F.Wolski,P.Dhariwal,A.Radford,andO.Klimov,“Proximal
policy optimization algorithms,” 2017, arXiv:1707.06347.
[31] S. Huang et al., “CleanRL: High-quality single-ﬁle implementations of
deep reinforcement learning algorithms,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 23,
no. 274, pp. 1–18, 2022.
[32] F. Kong et al., “MARSIM: A light-weight point-realistic simulator
for LiDAR-based UAVs,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 8, no. 5,
pp. 2954–2961, May 2023.
Authorized licensed use limited to: SOUTH CHINA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on October 29,2025 at 10:04:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
